Type I procollagens containing substitutions of aspartate, arginine, and cysteine for glycine in the pro alpha 1 (I) chain are cleaved slowly by N-proteinase, but only the cysteine substitution introduces a kink in the molecule.
Type I procollagen was purified from the medium of dermal fibroblasts cultured from four individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) type II who had mutations in the COL1A1 gene of type I procollagen. The procollagens were mixtures of normal molecules and molecules that contained substitutions of aspartate for glycine 97, arginine for glycine 550, cysteine for glycine 718, and aspartate for glycine 883 in one or both of the alpha 1 (I) chains of the molecule. The procollagens were cleaved more slowly than control type I procollagen by procollagen N-proteinase. Double-reciprocal plots of initial relative velocities and initial substrate concentrations indicated that the OI procollagens were all cleaved slowly by N-proteinase because of decreased Vmax, rather than increased Km. This suggested that slow cleavage of the OI procollagens by N-proteinase was the result of slow conversion of the N-proteinase-procollagen complex. Further experiments showed that the vertebrate collagenase A fragment of the aspartate for glycine alpha 1(I) 883 OI procollagen that contained the N-proteinase cleavage site but not the site of the substitution was also cleaved more slowly by N-proteinase than the normal vertebrate collagenase A fragments in the samples. These data show, for the first time, that an altered triple-helical structure is propagated from the site of a substitution of a bulky residue for glycine to the amino-terminal end of the procollagen molecule and disrupts the conformation of the N-proteinase cleavage site. Rotary shadowing electron microscopy of molecules in the preparation of cysteine for glycine alpha 1(I)-718 showed the presence of a kink in approximately 5% of a population of molecules in which 60% were abnormal and 20% contained a disulfide bond. In contrast, procollagens containing aspartate and arginine for glycine were indistinguishable by rotary shadowing electron microscopy from those in control samples. The results here confirm previous suggestions that substitution of cysteine for glycine in the alpha 1(I) chain of type I collagen can introduce a kink near the site of the substitution. However, the presence of a kink is not a prerequisite for delayed cleavage of abnormal procollagens by N-proteinase.