Ethnicity and mutations in GJB2 (connexin 26) and GJB6 (connexin 30) in a multi-cultural Canadian paediatric Cochlear Implant Program.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the relationship between ethnicity and mutations in the GJB2 and GJB6 genes in multi-cultural patients enrolled in a Canadian paediatric Cochlear Implant Program. METHODS: Blood was analyzed from 65 paediatric cochlear implant users by direct sequencing of the coding region and intron/exon boundaries of the GBJ2 gene. Individuals heterozygous for one mutation in GJB2 or in whom mutations in GJB2 were not detected were analyzed for the common 342 kb deletion mutation D13S1830 in the GJB6 gene. Information regarding ethnicity of patients' families was obtained from patient records and/or interview. RESULTS: GJB2 mutations were found in 36.9% of paediatric cochlear implant users tested. Nine different GJB2 mutations were identified among individuals from 14 different countries of origin. Seventy-eight percent of all identified pathogenic GJB2 mutations were 35delG. Biallelic GJB2 mutations were found in 16 cochlear implant users (66.7% of GJB2 mutations). Three novel GJB2 sequence changes were identified: (1) a missense mutation T107C (L36P) in an individual of African decent; (2) a missense mutation G475T (D159Y) in an individual of Caribbean decent; (3) a regulatory region change 1-34C to T in an individual of African decent. GJB6-D13S1830 mutations were not found in any of the patients tested. Individuals of African, Caribbean and East Indian decent had different GJB2 mutations than the remainder of individuals tested. Patients of Asian, Italian, Spanish, Polish and Armenian decent were not found to carry mutations in GJB2 or the common GJB6-D13S1830 mutation. CONCLUSIONS: This study represents the largest number of biallelic GJB2 mutations isolated in a group of paediatric cochlear implant users to date. Numerous and diverse GJB2 mutations were found in this multi-cultural group of children. Even though GJB2 mutations have been widely reported in the literature, this discussion represents the first report of GJB2 mutations in a multi-ethnic population (Canadian), as compared with previous studies that investigated fairly homogeneous populations. The diversity of GJB2 mutations identified reinforces the importance of testing for changes in GJB2 by direct sequencing of the entire coding region rather than testing only for common mutations.