Heterozygous mutation in the G+5 position of intron 33 of the pro-alpha 2(I) gene (COL1A2) that causes aberrant RNA splicing and lethal osteogenesis imperfecta. Use of carbodiimide methods that decrease the extent of DNA sequencing necessary to define an unusual mutation.
Cultured skin fibroblasts from a proband with osteogenesis imperfecta were found to synthesize normal and shortened alpha 2(I) chains of type I procollagen. A cDNA library was prepared using mRNA isolated from the proband's fibroblasts. Partial nucleotide sequencing of five clones demonstrated that two clones lacked the 54 base pairs (bp) of coding sequences found in exon 33 of the pro-alpha 2(I) gene (COL1A2). To reduce the amount of nucleotide sequencing required, heteroduplexes were prepared from two of the clones, one normal and the other lacking exon 33, and reacted with a water-soluble carbodiimide under conditions in which nonbase-paired G and T nucleotides are specifically modified by the reagent. Analysis of the heteroduplexes by immunoelectron microscopy suggested that the sequence variation near the codons of exon 33 was the only sequence difference in the cDNA clones. Amplification of cDNA from the proband by polymerase chain reaction gave products of two sizes, one of the expected size for the normal sequence and the other of the expected size for a product lacking the 54 bp in exon 33. To define the mutation in genomic DNA, a 1.6-kilobase region spanning exons 32 and 34 was amplified by the polymerase chain reaction and DNA heteroduplexes were prepared from the products. The heteroduplexes were treated with a water-soluble carbodiimide and then used as templates for primer extension under conditions in which extension terminates at the site of a carbodiimide-modified base. The results suggested a mismatch near the exon-intron boundary of exon 33 and a second mismatch near the 3' end of intron 33. Nucleotide sequencing of the polymerase chain reaction products revealed a single-base substitution in one allele that changed the moderately conserved G at position +5 of the 5' splice site of intron 33 to an A. In addition, there was an apparently neutral single-base substitution that placed both a G and T at position +661 of intron 33. The results provide only the third example of a mutation in the G at the +5 position of an intron that causes aberrant RNA splicing. Also, the results demonstrate that use of techniques involving carbodiimide modification of DNA heteroduplexes can reduce the amount of nucleotide sequencing necessary to define mutations in large and complex genes.