[Clinical and molecular genetic study on two patients of the juvenile form of Pompe disease in China].
OBJECTIVE: Glycogen-storage disease type II (GSD II, Pompe's disease) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a functional deficiency of acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) that leads to glycogen accumulation within lysosomes in most tissues. The GAA gene is located to human chromosome 17q25 and contains 20 exons, 19 of which are coding. Clinically, patients with the severe infantile form of GSD II have muscle weakness and cardiomyopathy eventually leading to death before the age of two years. Patients with the juvenile or the adult form of GSD II present with myopathy with a slow progression over several years or decades. A broad genetic heterogeneity has been described in GSD II in Europe, South Africa, USA, Japan and Korea, however, the investigation has not been performed in the patients from the mainland of China. In this study, clinical analysis and mutation detection were done on Chinese patients. METHODS: Two unrelated juvenile patients with late onset GSD II (one boy, 3 years old and one girl, 9 years old) were included in the study with the informed consents. The diagnosis was confirmed by alpha-glucosidase determination in cultured fibroblasts. In addition, their clinical presentation, laboratory findings, electrophysiologic studies and muscle biopsy findings were analyzed in detail. Genomic DNA samples were extracted from fibroblasts of the probands, from peripheral blood of their parents and 50 unrelated, normal individuals. All the coding 19 exons and exon-intron boundaries of GAA were detected in the proband by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and direct sequencing. RESULTS: One patient presented decrease of muscle strength, limb-girdle hypotonia, the other patient presented reduced muscle volumes and respiratory problems. Both had increased CPK value, myopathic pattern on EMG; vacuoles on muscle biopsy, and deficiency of 1, 4-alpha-glucosidase activity. After 1 year follow up, the girl died after pneumonia at 10 years of age. One patient was found to be compound heretozygote for the novel mutation Arg702His, and the previously reported mutation Pro266Ser, which was reported in Korean population, with the late-onset phenotype. Two novel missense mutations Thr711Arg, Val723Met were found on the other patients. CONCLUSIONS: Three mutations identified in the patient were new missense mutations causing late onset GSD II, which had not been reported elsewhere before.