A de novo G to T transversion in a pro-alpha 1 (I) collagen gene for a moderate case of osteogenesis imperfecta. Substitution of cysteine for glycine 178 in the triple helical domain.
Cultured fibroblasts from a patient affected with a moderate form of osteogenesis imperfecta were defective for the synthesis of type I collagen molecules; about half of the alpha 1(I) chains contained a cysteine residue in the triple helical domain and a disulfide link formed when two mutant alpha 1(I) chains were incorporated into a type I collagen heterotrimer. The proband's parents were clinically and biochemically normal. The cysteine was localized within peptide alpha 1(I)CB8 between residues 170 and 200 of the triple helical domain using a chemical procedure with 2-nitro-5-thiocyanobenzoic acid (Tenni, R., Rossi, A., Valli, M., Mottes, M., Pignatti, P. F., and Cetta, G. (1990) Matrix 10, 20-26). Type I procollagen heterotrimers containing either one or two mutant chains showed (i) a slight abnormality in secretion from cells; (ii) a low degree of post-translational overmodifications; (iii) the same, but lower than normal, thermal stability. Total RNA was isolated from the proband's dermal fibroblast cultures, and cDNAs for pro-alpha 1(I) were prepared d using total RNA. A portion of cDNA, coding for the region encompassing residues 119-193 of alpha 1(I) triple helical domain, was amplified by polymerase chain reaction. A single base pair mismatch was identified by chemical cleavage of DNA.DNA heteroduplexes, indicating a possible substitution of a guanine in the triplet coding for glycine 178 or 181. The same unique mismatch was detected by chemical cleavage in about one-half of the molecules in heteroduplexes formed between patient's pro-alpha 1(I) mRNAs and a normal cDNA probe. The amplified products were cloned and sequenced, confirming the heterozygous nature of the patient and demonstrating the presence and the location of a missense mutation; a single T for G substitution was found in the first base of the triplet coding for residue 178 of alpha 1(I) triple helical domain, leading to a cysteine for glycine substitution. Allele-specific oligonucleotide hybridization to amplified DNA confirmed a de novo point mutation in the proband's genome. The findings in this patient are in accord with the phenotypic gradient model, which correlates the localization of the structural defect with the clinical outcome of osteogenesis imperfecta. The mutant protein has some properties that differ from the caused by the cysteine for glycine 175 substitution, suggesting a direct influence of the neighboring amino acids on the effects of the mutation.