Reinforcement of a minor alternative splicing event in MYO7A due to a missense mutation results in a mild form of retinopathy and deafness.
PURPOSE: Recessive mutations of the myosin VIIA (MYO7A) gene are reported to be responsible for both a deaf-blindness syndrome (Usher type 1B [USH1B] and atypical Usher syndrome) and nonsyndromic hearing loss (HL; Deafness, Neurosensory, Autosomal Recessive 2 [DFNB2]). The existence of DFNB2 is controversial, and often there is no relationship between the type and location of the MYO7A mutations corresponding to the USH1B and DFNB2 phenotype. We investigated the molecular determinant of a mild form of retinopathy in association with a subtle splicing modulation of MYO7A mRNA. METHODS: Affected members underwent detailed audiologic and ocular characterization. DNA samples from family members were genotyped with polymorphic microsatellite markers. Sequencing of MYO7A was performed. Endogenous lymphoid RNA analysis and a splicing minigene assay were used to study the effect of the c.1935G>A mutation. RESULTS: Funduscopy showed mild retinitis pigmentosa in adults with HL. Microsatellite analysis showed linkage to markers in the region on chromosome 11q13.5. Sequencing of MYO7A revealed a mutation in the last nucleotide of exon 16 (c.1935G>A), which corresponds to a substitution of a methionine to an isoleucine residue at amino acid 645 of the myosin VIIA. However, structural prediction of the molecular model of myosin VIIA shows that this amino acid replacement induces only minor structural changes in the immediate environment of the mutation and thus does not alter the overall native structure. We found that, although predominantly included in mature mRNA, exon 16 is in fact alternatively spliced in control cells and that the mutation at the very last position is associated with a switch toward a predominant exclusion of that exon. This observation was further supported using a splicing minigene transfection assay; the c.1935G>A mutation was found to trigger a partial impairment of the adjacent donor splice site, suggesting that the unique change at the last position of the exon is responsible for the enhanced exon exclusion in this family. CONCLUSIONS: This study shows how an exonic mutation that weakens the 5' splice site enhances a minor alternative splicing without abolishing a complete exclusion of the exon and therefore causes a less severe retinitis pigmentosa than the USH1B-associated alleles. It would be interesting to examine a possible correlation between intrafamilial phenotypic variability and the subtle variation in exon 16 inclusion, probably related to genetic background specificities.