Hemoglobin Syracuse (alpha2beta2-143(H21)His leads to Pro), a new high-affinity variant detected by special electrophoretic methods. Observations on the auto-oxidation of normal and variant hemoglobins.
Family members from four generations were found to have polycythemia and increased whole blood O2 affinity (P50; 11 mm Hg; normal, 27 mm Hg). No abnormal hemoglobin bands were seen after electrophoresis on starch gel at pH 8.6 or agar gel at pH 6.0. Analysis of the oxygenated hemolysate by isoelectric focusing on polyacrylamide gel revealed two closely spaced bands. When deoxygenated hemolysate was analyzed in oxygen-free gels, the two components were more widely separated. About 40% of the patient's hemoglobin focused at a more acid pH than hemoglobin A, indicating a hemoglobin variant with impaired Bohr effect. Chromatography of globin in 8 M urea revealed two beta-chain peaks, the first of which was eluted at a lower buffer molarity than normal beta chain. Fingerprints of tryptic digests of the aminoethylated chains were done on silica gel thin-layer plates. Tp 14 from the abnormal beta chain had slower electrophoretic mobility and a greater Rf value. Amino acid analyses of this peptide gave values identical with those of betaTp 14, except that it contained one proline residue and no histidine. Since the one His in betaTp 14 is in position 143, hemoglobin Syracuse in alpha2beta2-143 His leads to Pro. Native Hb Syracuse could be separated from hemoglobin A on a carboxymethylcellulose column. The inclusion of 0.1 mM EDTA in the preparative buffers proved very useful in reducing the formation of methemoglobin. Oxygen equilibria of purified hemoglobin Syracuse showed high oxygen affinity (P50 value 12% that of hemoglobin A) and lack of cooperativity between subunits (Hill's n equals 1.1). The alkaline Bohr effect was about half that of hemoglobin A. The proline substitution at betaH21 disrupts the helical configuration and probably prevents the formation of salt bonds that are important in stabilizing the deoxy structure and contribute to the alkaline Bohr effect. Since beta143 His is a binding site for 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG), it is not suprising that hemoglobin Syracuse had markedly impaired reactivity with 2,3-DPG. Hemoglobin Syracuse auto-oxidized more slowly than hemoglobin A, probably reflecting a slower rate of dissociation of oxygen from fully liganded hemoglobin.