Assessment of role of beta 146-histidyl and other histidyl residues in the Bohr effect of human normal adult hemoglobin.
The contribution of the carboxyl-terminal histidines of the beta chains, beta 146(HC3), to the alkaline Bohr effect of human normal adult hemoglobin has been shown by this laboratory to depend upon the solvent composition. Using high-resolution proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, we have found that the pKa value of the beta 146-histidine is 8.0 in the deoxy form, while in the carbonmonoxy form it ranges from 7.1 to 7.85 depending upon the concentration of inorganic phosphate and chloride ions present. These conclusions have been questioned by Perutz and co-workers on the basis of biochemical, structural, and proton nuclear magnetic resonance studies of mutant and enzymatically or chemically modified hemoglobins [Perutz, M. F., Kilmartin, J. V., Nishikura, K., Fogg, J. H., Butler, P. J., & Rollema, H. S. (1980) J. Mol. Biol. 138, 649-670; Kilmartin, J. V., Fogg, J. H., & Perutz, M. F. (1980) Biochemistry 19, 3189-3193; Perutz, M. F., Gronenborn, A. M., Clore, G. M., Fogg, J. H., & Shih, D. T.-b. (1985) J. Mol. Biol. 183, 491-498]. In this work, we use proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to assess the effects of structural modifications on the histidyl residues and on the overall conformation of the hemoglobin molecule in solution. The structural perturbations investigated all occur within the tertiary domains around the carboxyl-terminal region of the beta chain as follows: Hb Cowtown (beta 146His----Leu); Hb Wood (beta 97His----Leu); Hb Malmo (beta 97His----Gln); Hb Abruzzo (beta 143His----Arg). Our results demonstrate that the conformational effects of single-site structural modifications upon the conformation and dynamics of hemoglobin depend strongly on their location in the three-dimensional structure of the protein molecule and also on their chemical nature. Furthermore, in normal hemoglobin, the spectral properties of several surface histidyl residues are found to depend, in the ligated state, upon the nature of the ligand. Our present findings do not support the recent spectral assignments proposed by Perutz et al. (1985) for the proton resonances of the beta 146- and beta 97-histidines and their suggestion that the enzymatic removal of the carboxyl-terminal beta 146-histidyl residues induces a conformational equilibrium for the beta 97-histidines in the des-beta 146His hemoglobin molecule in the carbonmonoxy form.