Alternative splicing in COL1A1 mRNA leads to a partial null allele and two In-frame forms with structural defects in non-lethal osteogenesis imperfecta.
We have identified a novel multiexon genomic deletion in one COL1A1 collagen allele that results in three alternative forms of mutant mRNA. This mutation occurs in a 9-year-old girl and her father, both affected with severe type III osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). We previously reported detection of a mismatch in their alpha1(I) amino acids 558-861 region by RNA/RNA hybrid analysis (Grange, D. K., Gottesman, G. S., Lewis, M. B., and Marini, J. C. (1990) Nucleic Acids Res. 18, 4227-4236). Single Strand Conformational Polymorphism further localized the mRNA mutation to the amino acids 579-679 coding region. At the gene level, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of patient leukocyte DNA from the exon 33-38 region yielded the normal 1004-base pair (bp) fragment and an additional 442-bp fragment. Sequencing of the shorter genomic PCR product confirmed the presence of a 562-bp deletion, extending from the last 3 nucleotides (nt) of exon 34 to 156 nt from the 3'-end of intron 36. The genomic deletion was also detected in the clinically normal grandmother, who was confirmed to be a mosaic carrier. PCR amplification and RNase protection experiments were used to investigate the mRNA structure and occurrence of alternative splicing. One form of the mutant cDNA has a deletion with end points that are identical to the genomic deletion. This results in a combination deletion/insertion, with a deletion of amino acids 603-639 followed by an insertion of 156 nt from the 3'-end of intron 36. In addition, we found two alternatively spliced forms. One form uses a cryptic donor site in exon 34 and the exon 37 acceptor. The second form uses the normal exon 32 splice donor and exon 37 acceptor. Use of the cryptic donor results in a coding sequence that is out-of-frame. Both the retained intron form and the use of the exon 32 donor site result in coding sequences that are in-frame. This is the first report of a collagen defect in OI with alternative splicing generating both in-frame and out-of-frame forms of mRNA. Although the in-frame forms constitute more than 60% of the mRNA from the mutant allele, no mutant protein chain was identified. Collagen produced by cultured OI osteoblasts showed a significant increase in the relative amount of type III collagen but no mutant alpha1(I) chain.