Carrier and prenatal diagnosis of X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency: mutation detection methods and utilization.
IL2RG, the gene encoding the common gamma chain, gamma c, of the receptor for interleukin-2 and other cytokines, has been identified as the disease gene for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) of the X-linked type. Specific mutational diagnosis for X-linked SCID has thus become possible. For many women at risk for carrying an IL2RG mutation, no samples were saved from an affected male relative prior to either death or bone marrow transplantation (BMT). To establish optimal methods for genetic evaluation of such women, we compared mutational screening by single-strand conformational polymorphism, heteroduplex analysis and dideoxy fingerprinting (ddF). Abnormally migrating band patterns were followed up with direct sequencing for identification of specific mutations. The most sensitive method, ddF, detected heterozygous alterations, subsequently confirmed to represent significant mutations, in all of 19 unrelated obligate or suspected carriers studied. Some of these women, as well as others at risk for carrying an X-linked SCID mutation, enrolled in a study of prenatal diagnosis after fetal testing for gender determination. Originally using linkage analysis and, more recently, specific detection of IL2RG mutations, we evaluated pregnancies at risk for X-linked SCID prospectively on a research basis. Of 27 male fetuses tested 14 were predicted to be unaffected and confirmed to have normal immune status at birth. Among pregnancies predicted to be affected, 2 were terminated, while 11 affected males were born at term. Nine of these received neonatal BMT, one had BMT at 3 months of age, and one underwent a successful experimental in utero BMT. In our study cohort accurate prenatal diagnosis assisted decision making and expanded treatment options for families at risk for having infants with a severe, but treatable genetic disorder that presents early in life.